Want to make money. 
Not needing to make money. 

When you NEED something, it never fails to slip through your fingers. Like a desperate first date, the tighter you cling, the more the other person wants to get away. 
Money works the same way. 

I've been needing money too much.


You are worthy 
Not needing to make money to survive. 
Not needing to make money in order to justify my existence.

Appreciate what you have while wanting more. 
Show appreciation for all exchanges of value, a lot of which isn't monetary or even physical. The last few years I've largely been supported by being a caregiver, housekeeper, and recently, gardener. There are lots of wants to give and receive value, money simply is a measure of that, though it's not required. Think about the value you provide to friends if you give advice, directions, or help fix something. Think about the value you provide by listening to another's emotions and simply empathizing with them. About exchanging gifts. In petting a cat. 
We always want more. That's okay. 

Are you a plant, or a machine? 
Plants add inherent value. Valued from a seed to fully grown. 
Machines

Millionaires make and lose their fortunes. Fear of losing money. 


Wanting to make money because it's fun. It's like a game. The currency is so arbitrary, like numbers on a game. 
Investments are fun. 
Simply, the more money you have, the more you can do, but you still are able to live and enjoy a great deal of life without money. My favorite activities are largely free and I could easily do filthy rich or living in a car: drawing, writing, reading, enjoying nature, having interesting conversations.

Make a list of fun things you want to do with money. Don't limit your money spending to survival necessities. 

Give

+

Sacrifice 

Often when thinking about money, I would feel like no opportunity could possibly justify the sacrifices I have made to better myself financially. 
School dual enrollment. 
Working with the manipulative mentor to start a design business. 

I was convinced over and over again that sacrificing in the present would pay off in the long run. I no longer believe this. The only thing sacrificing did was make it easy for people to take advantage of me. My boundaries were weak, and it meant long periods of unemployed stretches in order to recover emotionally.

+

Money is like air. Always there when you need it. 

I was able to travel the country without much income. 
Living supported by others.

Money is a lot like a relationship. It will be hard to get one if you don't already enjoy being alone with yourself. Desperation. A relationship is simply a magnifier of what is. 
Money is similar. 


I accept the leader within me. 
I haven't needed much money. I've valued freedom instead. 
