---
layout: post
title: "The Tao of Time Management"
categories: personal-dev mastery productivity
tags: yin-yang balance tao peace happiness productivity
author: "Amanda Lynn Elliott"
permalink: /blog/2020/01/intuitive-academics/
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

<blockquote>"…Order comes from chaos and chaos from order, and this harnessed just right…creates art.”
<footer>—Jerry Saltz on Fiscli & Weiss’s entropic 1987 chain-reaction film, The Way Things Go</footer></blockquote>

## Balance is the Key

We humans are delicate organisms. We require utmost balance in all things. Just the right amount of water: too much and you drown, too little and you die of dehydration. Our requirements for balance extends out to all of our needs: temperature, food and nutrients, and work and relaxation balance, and so on. 

I deeply resonate with the Chinese ancient wisdom about the balancing polarities of Yin and Yang. This is the perspective that helps me maintain balance and be effective as I manage my time and energy.

*I made this visualization, and describe it below.*

[yin yang]

Adversity is simply how life unleashes your excellence from within: something ‘out there’ will make you grow ‘in here.’
Consciousness induces action, but it does not inspire it.

### The Yin and Yang of Time Management

Yin is the receptive, intuitive, feminine energy.
Yang is the will, force, logic,  masculine energy.

I’ve tried living fully in one or the other with mixed results. 

I’ve tried living life fully from a Yang perspective: being objective and forceful in how I managed myself. I made strict schedules, and decided what to work on based on what was logical rather than how I felt. I ended up making lots of progress working on the wrong things for the wrong reasons. I never took breaks unless I was exhausted, and burnt myself out. 

In recovering from that, I tried living life from a purely Yin perspective: being playful, in the present moment, and focusing more on how I felt rather than the outcomes I would produce. However, operating this way for extended periods of time left me feeling aimless and like I wasn’t making progress. 

Balancing both perspectives seems to be the most optimal. 

Yang brings structure and direction. He is goal-orientated and good at prioritizing. Meanwhile, Yin adds well-needed emotional awareness, playfulness, and makes life worth living. 

Just like breathing, balancing between both perspectives allows me to get my work done, still make time for friends and hobbies, and feel much happier.

### How to know if you are balanced

When you are balanced, there are of course the obvious signs: feeling well physically and emotionally. 

Synchronicities 
When you set intentions, they happen
You are connected to your intuition
Your dreams are vivid and have meaning 
Overall things flow in an effortless way.
Sometimes the shortest distance between two points is not a straight line! You may have in your mind a vision of what should happen in your life in order to feel __ (loved, fulfilled, etc), but subjective reality will match this in ways you can not anticipate. 
It's fun. Be the magician, full of creative potential. 

[Magician tarot card]


How to Listen to Your Intuition

Get clear on your priorities. 


+++


When I started back at school, I made the following commitment to myself:

I will prioritize my wellbeing (mental, emotional, physical) over external pressures like assignments, projects, and exams, by listening to my intuition at all times.  

It’s understandable to break this occasionally in the case of odd crisis that may occur. For example, pulling an all-nighter for a project that makes the difference between passing or failing a class. However, these kind of situations should be rare. 

The problem is that many people operate under this peak stress and anxiety so frequently that it becomes a new normal. Campus is full of students and teachers who take maximum workloads, and apply themselves 100% of the time to 100% of the expectations they opt-in for. 
<!-- 
I’ve also made friends with multiple people who feel drawn to doing academic research, but are scared of the expectations that academia requires for people to constantly “Publish or perish,” which translates to little to no personal time.
It’s like overtraining. If you strength train for hours everyday without giving your body rest in between workouts, an injury is bound to happen. 
It’s too early to say where I’ll go upon graduating, but more than likely it will be into academics in order to do physics-related research. However, despite supposed academic expectations, I will continue to keep my promise to prioritizing my wellbeing and happiness.  -->

Academia does not have a monopoly on overworked people. Overworking is rampant in every industry. 

The problem is not the pressure that other people put on us. The problem is our lack of boundaries when it comes to saying no. There are some common reasons for this. 

### Overemphasis on Quantitative Results

Even from elementary school, I witnessed external pressures placed on results, such as test scores and competitions, not for the best interest of students but for the survival of the school. These results translate into funding. Whether we like it or not, we live in a highly quantitative, Big Data society. Numbers are used to make decisions, but we should be wary of which numbers we are emphasizing, how that data is gathered, and the unintended consequences of tying too much weight to these metrics. 

When school test scores are tied to funding, teachers teach to the test, struggling schools fudge test scores, students adapt by becoming competitive instead of collaborative, bullying ensues, and enriching skills like teamwork, critical thinking, and creativity suffer.

This overemphasis of data doesn’t stop at primary school. In college it comes in the form of the GPA. For professors and researchers, it comes in the form of number of papers published in a span of time and the amount of funding brought in for various research projects.

Before going into why people tend to overwork themselves and have a hard time saying no, let’s consider why more is not always more. 

Higher test scores, higher GPAs, more papers published… these seem like fine goals to strive for. What could go wrong with encouraging this? 

#### Struggle vs Play

Firstly, it misses the point. It encourages people to focus on how to pass tests rather than how to apply the content they are being taught. When people are overworked and only focus on how to get the scores they need, they don’t have the excess time or energy to play with the concepts they’re learning in interesting ways. 

In my experience, there isn't always a clear correlation between testing well and intuitively knowing how to apply concepts to unfamiliar, and even strange, situations. To test well, you practice taking tests. However, the world isn't structured like a series of concise, properly formatted word problems. Often you are given too much information, or too little, and you need to, at a higher level, grasp what you are trying to do and why. The experience for this kind of real-world problem solving comes from trying to solve the kind of problems that you don't have pre-existing "plug-and-chug" frameworks for. In your limited experience, your first attempts to solve such high-level problems are likely wrong, but being right is not the point. The point is playful outside-the-box practice. 

Framing learning in playful ways can be the most effective and fulfilling way to learn. It’s an artful approach to problem solving and applying scientific concepts, and the results can be as unique as the individual producing them.

Unfortunately, this kind of practice can appear quite random compared to the linear progression of coursework, and so doesn't always translate to higher test scores or GPAs.

Moving forward in academia, I’ve decided that I would rather regularly devote time to projects that allow this kind of serendipitous practice, even if it means forfeiting a perfect 4.0 GPA. 


#### Rest Cures Tunnel Vision

Secondly, an overemphasis on work causes tunnel vision. When you never take breaks away from your work to look at the world around you, it causes you to lose perspective. Having periods of personal time and rest allow you to direct focus away from work, which gives insight into the following questions:
Is this work still meaningful to me?
Is this work the best use of my time?
Is there something that I am overlooking?
Is there a better way to go about this?
Often it is only once we look away from work, that the elusive “Eureka” moment strikes. These periods of rest allow for inspiration to be recharged, and for serendipitous encounters or creative solutions to arise. Rest gives us the perspective needed to change course if needed, allowing us to be more efficient, accomplishing more by doing less.

Unfortunately, many people view rest as equivalent to “waste.” The activities we engage in when relaxing are viewed as a “waste of time.” To that I say, try to live by only breathing in--by only inhaling. Inhale, inhale, inhale… You have to let it go eventually. 

Balance is the key. You will be as effective in proportion to how balanced you are. 

#### The Work Suffers

Moreover, when people overwork and only focus on quantitative results, the quality of their work suffers. In trying to appease external pressures rather than satisfying intrinsic motivation, the work ends up being dull, unoriginal, and unsurprising. People are less inclined to take risks, less playful in their approaches, less open to alternative perspectives, and progress is slow. 

This is a problem that will persist as long as people continue to prioritize satisfying external pressures over their balance and happiness. 

The work will either soar or languish in tandem with the worker who created it.

## Boundaries: Why it’s hard to say No



### Self-Worth

Much of my stress this semester was unnecessary and due to trying to get straight A's. A main reason people tend to overwork themselves is because they learn to tie their self-worth to external metrics like grades. If you grow up being rewarded or punished depending on these external outcomes, it’s the only way to adapt. 

Tying self-worth to academic performance may also have to do with the fear of disappointing others, or a fear of not measuring up to others. Either way, many people come from a place of “lack” and look to academic performance as the thing that can fill the void. 

Self-worth is inherent, and you should never take external metrics as an invitation to start beating yourself up. 

If you fail at something, there is a lesson in that failure. I would even argue that there is more value in failure than success, and failure is more fun than success. This is why video games are so popular. Could you imagine playing a new video game only to discover that you were immediately good at everything in it, beating every level, and never failing? That’s not fun!

Video games tap into the part of us that want challenge and failure in a risk-free environment. When you fail in a video game, it doesn’t mean anything about you as a person. But people unnecessarily attach more meaning to failing a class. 

In reality, failing a class doesn’t mean anything other than an opportunity to try again, this time stronger from the experience, or to assess if this path is not as fulfilling for you as you originally thought.

How can you minimize the risk involved with failing in your career and academic projects so that you can have more fun with failure?  

### Scarcity Mindsets

Another reason that people have a hard time saying no is that they get stuck in a scarcity mindset. This means that they perceive a lack of resources, such as time, money, relationships, and opportunities. 

Belief in the scarcity of time scares us into thinking that you must do something in excess now while we can (working, relaxing, indulging, etc.), even though it throws you off balance. 

Belief in the scarcity of money scares you into not enjoying the money you have in the present. In getting defensive, hoarding, and projecting a vibe a desperation, you also prevent the opportunities that would lead to more money generation from coming your way. 

Belief in the scarcity of relationships keeps people in unfulfilling and toxic relationships because of the fear that they cannot find better people. This is a self-fulfilling belief. You won't find people better suited to you if you aren't looking. 

Belief in the scarcity of opportunities keeps people in work conditions that drain rather than invigorate them. It keeps them in positions where they feel like they aren't developing their  potential, where they aren’t doing the work they are inspired to do, and where they eventually they grow resentful of their "captor's" (employers). 

The beliefs you choose to have about the world affects how you interact with the world and how people perceive you. 

Scarcity mindsets will distort your reality. It will convince you that there are no other resources, preventing you from searching, which becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy. Scarcity makes you believe that you are a victim of your reality rather than it’s creator. 

It’s easy to point to external circumstances as the cause of stress: a demanding teacher, employer, or industry. But the source of stress is never external. Stress is how you perceive external circumstances. You always have the choice to change either your internal or external environment. You can change the situation or change your thoughts about the situation. Stress only has the power that you give it, and in giving it power, you weaken yourself.

Often the strongest and most self-loving thing you can do is to say No to the external pressures that weigh you down rather than lift you up.

+


## Feedback Loop

This semester I took mostly freshmen classes, and so made quite a few friends with people just out of high school. 

Almost every 19 year old I met started the semester with one major, and ended their semester with a different major. Out of high school, you have no idea who you are and what your career interests are, and this is normal! 

My advice is to let yourself explore. To use the video game metaphor again, when you play a video game, you engage in a feedback loop. When you try certain things in the game, you receive immediate feedback on if those actions bring you closer to winning the game or not. 

In your everyday life, you have a similar feedback loop. The feedback is how you feel. There is no way that you will know if a career path would be fulfilling to you unless you try it out. You need to act on a potential career, and gauge your feedback to see whether you enjoy it or not. 

People often make the mistake of choosing their career path and committing to it before they have any self-awareness of how they would feel doing that kind of work everyday. Be wary of pigeonholing yourself too early.

Personally, I’m glad that I tried pursuing an art career. I tried again and again to make different kinds of art as a full-time job, but I couldn’t be consistent with it and I was rarely happy. I’m grateful for the knowledge from this: moving forward, I don’t have to wonder about an art career. It’s not a mystery to me anymore. 

If anything, I wish I let go of art sooner. I kept waiting for it to “feel right.” I tried so many different art fields, techniques, and work schedules, but it never clicked. If you are waiting for something to “feel right,” you might be trying to get apple juice out of an orange. 

Find what you are intrinsically motivated to do, what you are good at to the point of taking it for granted, and don’t let the stress of external pressures muddy it up. 

The best way to get feedback for a potential career is to integrate yourself in communities in that industry. As soon as possible, start meeting people in the field and asking them questions. Do you want to keep talking with them and eventually do their kind of work? 

It also helps to start personal projects that are free from any kind of external pressure. With a personal project, you are free to experiment, to fail and try again. Experimenting with different kinds of projects allows you to find the kind of failure that you enjoy. 

It’s also paramount to show your projects to people working in the industry and get constructive feedback. This was something I rarely ever did when I was pursuing art. My ego was too fragile. I was never motivated enough to ask to interview any artists or to apply for a studio. It just never felt right. 

However, within the first week of classes, I asked to meet a physics professor and expressed an interest in a research position he was offering. I was surprised that he brought me on the team! You would be surprised, but often, expressing an interest is all it takes. 

You might fool yourself into thinking that you aren’t ready for feedback, but that’s kind of like playing a video game and never advancing past the tutorial. Where’s the fun in that? ;-)

## Internet vs College Learning

When I graduated high school, I thought to myself that “I don’t need college; I have the internet!” 

While it is true that the internet is an incredible resource that is full of incredible educational content, I’m relieved to be back in college. 

When you start a field, you don’t know what you don’t know. The structure of college is refreshing because of its linear progression (as long as it’s not taken too seriously). I don’t have to think about “What to learn” anymore. It’s all laid out for me. 

I’ve learned more in the last semester than I thought I could in four months. Much of this was because of the external pressure. Learning on your own can at times be too relaxed and too socially isolating. 

As in all things, we need balance. Too little challenge and you become bored. Too much challenge and you become overwhelmed with anxiety. It’s up to you to gauge what sweet spot of challenge gets you excited to work and gets you in the flow state.



+

I Ching - 62, 15

